Landscape connectivity is vital to the long-term survival of plant and animal populations. At varying scales, connectivity is 
necessary for feeding, migration, mating, genetic diversity, and dispersal to new areas. As climate change alters habitat, 
species will be forced to alter their geographic distribution, in some cases dispersing great distances over generations. 
Where connectivity is broken by unsuitable habitat, roads and other types of development, it is likely that many plant and 
animal populations will disappear over time. **ecoConnect**, our model of regional connectivity, provides conservation 
practitioners with maps and data that can inform conservation actions aimed at maintaining connected landscapes for multiple 
species, both locally and across the Northeast.

We started the analysis by selecting points with high ecological integrity in a 2 km grid. These points were connected to 
other points within 5 km based on development, road traffic, and ecological similarity relative to each starting point. These 
connections were made with *random low cost paths*, which mapped a large number of suboptimal, but reasonably good routes, 
yielding paths that represent local connectivity. We counted the number of times each path was used in connecting each pair of 
points across the entire Northeast, and used this regional analysis to weight local connectivity resulting in metrics of 
regional connectivity that are

* **Truly regional**: rather than chaining local or medium-scale connectivity, this approach assessed paths hundreds of miles 
long, from Virginia to Maine
* **Multi-scale**: connectivity was assessed at multiple scales, so results are meaningful for a town, a state, or the 
Northeastern U.S.
* **Ecosystem-aware**: rather than simply connecting undeveloped land, connectivity was estimated for forests or wetlands or 
even finer groups such as ridgetop forests or floodplain forests, and paths were based on ecological similarity to the target 
systems
* **Independent of pre-defined conservation targets**: rather than connecting existing or aspirational conservation cores, all 
of the landscape was connected, so conservation targets may be brought in later in the planning process or omitted entirely

ecoConnect can be used to assess the level of connectivity among existing conservation land, and to target additional land to 
conserve connectivity, including   land important for connectivity that might not otherwise be protected because it is not 
highly rated for habitat quality or ecological integrity. It can also be used to assess potential locations for road crossing 
structures for wildlife and identify bridges and culverts that may already provide connectivity under high-traffic roads.

*Funded by USGS Northeast Climate Adaptation Science Center and the intramural research program of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, National Institute of Food and Agriculture, McIntire-Stennis and Renewable Resources Extension Act (RREA) 
programs.*

<a href="https://landeco.umass.edu/web/lcc/dsl/ecoconnect/dsl_documentation_ecoConnect.pdf" target="_blank" rel="noopener 
noreferrer">How ecoConnect works</a>

<a href="https://umassdsl.org/data/ecoConnect" target="_blank" rel="noopener">ecoConnect home page</a>
